Eddie is 15 years old man and lives at home with parents.  Eddie’s brother Jack and sister Jill live locally however do not visit often due to Eddie’s challenging behaviours.  Eddie has a diagnosis of moderate intellectual disability and insulin dependent type 1 diabetes.

Eddie enjoys spending time with other males his age who include him in their activities and most of all being active.  Eddie is a very fast runner and loves to race others across any open spaces he finds himself in.  Due to Eddie’s fitness, height and long legs, he outruns most people.  Eddie will often laugh loudly whilst he is running.  

Eddie’s favourite things are spending time with his dad, running, wide open spaces, playing basketball and watching aeroplanes.  Upon hearing an aeroplane, Eddie will run from wherever he is to get a look at the aeroplane and will laugh loudly whilst looking up and waving at them.  Eddie goes to basketball training Tuesday and Thursday afternoon, playing games with other teams most Saturdays.

At home Eddie requires prompting to attend to his personal hygiene needs and to assist daily activities.  Eddie responds well to being shown what to do then staying with him for support whilst he tries to imitate them.  

Eddie enjoys being outside in his back yard, in the sunshine, and often runs around without any real direction with a big smile on his face.  

Eddie is a good sleeper, putting himself to bed before 9.00 pm, waking between 6.00 and 7.00 in the morning each day.  Eddie will generally always sleep through any disturbances during the night, however, if woken, it can take some time to encourage Eddie back to bed, rather than getting up to start his day.  If it is still dark outside this is easier to do.

Eddie’s family report that Eddie shows signs of unease, such as tightened jaw, upper body and limbs, when in a vehicle.  They also report that it is difficult to get Eddie into and out of any vehicle.

Eddie enjoys his food however does not appear to understand why he can’t eat the same food as others.  Family and staff report behaviours of concern to be a regular occurrence at meal times both within the home and at school.  Eddie also does not like to have his insulin injection each day and family are always prepared for behaviours of concern such as hitting people at injection time which is generally at 8.00 am (following the advice of Eddie’s specialist).  A nutritionist has provided a detailed menu plan which family and school staff follow diligently.  Eddie does not like to go and see the nutritionist and often family send her reports of how Eddie is going rather than taking him to see her.

Eddie attends St Lucia State High School.  Due to his learning needs he receives assistance from a teacher’s aide in the classroom. The teacher provides differentiated curriculum and instruction as required due to the impact of his intellectual impairment on his learning.  When Eddie is supported he works well on academic tasks and demonstrates a willingness to try hard.

Eddie usually attends school five days a week.  Unfortunately, due to Eddie’s ongoing use of physical aggression to staff and peers, Eddie was suspended from attending for a couple of weeks period in mid-October.

The relationship between Eddie and his fellow students can be both positive and negative.  When the students are all engaged in preferred activities either with school staff or each other, there is a real sense of camaraderie and friendship.  However, Eddie will often instigate physical aggression, hitting or forcefully pushing other students, if he has had to wait for any period of time.

Eddie does well when surrounded by other young men, engaged in physical activities of any kind especially basketball and any game that involves running.  Eddie also uses positive body language such as smiling and shaking hands with others.

Eddie is able to communicate most of his needs through the use of some single syllable words i.e. yes and no in context, help, hurt, run, now, dad, mum, Jack, Jill, out, why, ball, me, food, car, plane, fast, need - short for needle and gestures.  Eddie understands two to three step instructions and maximum 8 word sentences that are kept clear, simple and spaced apart.  His ability to use words to communicate significantly decreases leading up to and during his use of behaviours of concern.

Eddie responds well to large group activities [especially with other males] that involve physical activity and often has a big smile on his face at these times.  However, if Eddie arrives late and is unable to engage in a preferred activity, he will always respond with aggression to those who advise of his inability to join in.   When it is raining and outdoor activities are cancelled, and everyone is inside, Eddie will generally respond with behaviours of concern such as hitting and pushing other students, yelling loudly at others and property damage.

Eddie likes to know what is happening next, so having a routine is important to him.  If there are required changes to the routine these need to be explained to him in advance, and preferably, emailed to his parents so that they can reinforce the change in the evening before school.  If there is an unexpected or unexplained change, or if the materials needed for an activity aren’t prepared, he can become agitated and upset.

In class he prefers to work in quieter areas and can become anxious and agitated when the classroom is noisy or there is a lot of activity.  Eddie can work well on academic tasks but will not take risks if he is unsure whether he will able to complete the activity successfully.  When he finds the work difficult or too challenging he can refuse to participate.

Eddie has a small friendship circle at school, generally with other students who include him in their sporting games during breaks.  Eddie often does not initiate interactions with the other students, usually only interacting when other students initiate the interaction.